---
layout: main
title: "Changelog"
---
h1. Changelog

h2. Version 1.6 (2013-05-24)

* Width attribute in "Textblock":../commands-en/textblock.html and "Table":../commands-en/table.html optional (1.5.56)
* Allow "group":../commands-en/group.html specific grid (1.5.49)
* New "XPath-function":xpath.html @sd:decode-html()@ to decode @&lt;@ and similar entities into real HTML. (1.5.47)
* New commands "Ol":../commands-en/ol.html and "Ul":../commands-en/ol.html, just like HTML. @Ol@ and @Ul@ (with @Li@) are also allowed in data. (1.5.46)
* Hyperlinks are allowed in data: @<a href="http://...">text</a>@. (1.5.46)
* New command "A":../commands-en/a.html for hyperlinks (same as HTML). (1.5.45)
* New attribute @version@ at command "Layout":../commands-en/layout.html to ensure version number (1.5.44).
* New command "HSpace":../commands-en/hspace.html that inserts a stretchable space. (1.5.43)
* New sp-command @compare@ for "PDF comparison/quality assurance":qualityassurance.html (1.5.42)
* New command "Br":../commands-en/br.html that inserts a newline. Br tags also allowed in "Value":../commmands-en/value.html. (1.5.41)
* New "XPath-function":xpath.html @sd:format-number()@ to add thousand's separator to numbers (1.5.41)
* Rename "XPath-function":xpath.html function @sd:format-number()@ in @sd:format-string()@ (1.5.41)
* New command "Loop":../commands-en/loop.html to repeat the contents of the element for a given number. (1.5.38)
* New "XPath function":xpath.html @sd:pagenumber(<mark>)@ to obtain the page number of a mark (1.5.36).
* New command "Mark":../commands-en/mark.html to create invisible markers. (1.5.36)
* New "XPath functions":xpath.html @ceiling()@ and @floor()@ (1.5.36).
* New options: @sp --wd DIR@ to set the working directory. See "command line":commandline.html (1.5.36)
* New command: @sp clean@ to clean up. See "command line":commandline.html (1.5.35)
* Changed "XPath-function":xpath.html @sd:alternating()@ and introduced @sd:reset-alternating()@. (1.5.35)
* Attribute @eval@ in "Table":../commands-en/table.html for XPath expression execution. (1.5.35)
* File uri now uses three slashes for file access: @file:///c:/foo/bar.baz@ (cf. "File URI scheme":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_URI_scheme#Windows_2) (1.5.35)
* New XML parser - no special binary needed anymore (1.5.35)
* "Image":../commands-en/image.html accepts an URI (@file://...@) as an argument for @file@. Similar the "XPath expressions":xpath.html @sd:number-of-pages()@, @sd:imagewidth()@ and @sd:file-exists()@. (1.5.33)

(Changelog until 1.5.32 is available in German only. See "the German changelog":../description-de/changelog.html)
