---
layout: main
title: "speedata publisher configuration"
---

h1.  How to configure the speedata publisher

The speedata publisher can be configured in several ways:

# The file @publisher.cfg@ in @/etc/speedata/@, in the home directory (with a leading dot) and in the current working directory
# Parameters given on the command line
# Options given in the layout file

h2.  The file @publisher.cfg@

The file @publisher.cfg@ (@/etc/speedata/publisher.cfg@, @$HOME/.publisher.cfg@ and in the current working directory) is a text file, that is read at the beginning of the publisher run. The default file looks like this:

pre. data      = data.xml
layout    = layout.xml
autoopen  = false

The format of the file is important, otherwise it won't be recognized. The following options are supported:

- @autoopen@ := if @true@, the publisher opens the PDF file. Default: @false@. The same effect can be achieved if you run  @sp --autoopen@.
- @data@    := Name of the data file (XML). If not given, the system uses @data.xml@.
- @dummy@   := If @true@, the system won't read the data file, instead it uses the single element @<data />@ as its input.
- @extra-dir@ := A list of directories in the file system separated by @;@ (Windows) or @:@ (Mac, Linux). These directories contain the images, fonts, source files and other assets that are used during the publisher run.
- @filter@  := Run the given file as an XPROC-Filter.
- @fontpath@ := Set the path for system fonts. On Windows this is @%WINDIR%\Fonts@, on Mac OS X it defaults to @/Library/Fonts:/System/Library/Fonts@.
- @grid@    := If @true@, the underlying grid is shown in the PDF file. For debugging purpose only.
- @imagecache@ := Folder for chaced images (@url="http://..."@ only). Defaults to @$TMPDIR/sp/images@.
- @jobname@ := Name of the output file. Default is @publisher@.
- @layout@  := Name of the layout rule set (XML). The default name is @layout.xml@.
- @opencommand@ := Command that will be run to open the documentation and the PDF file. For MacOS X this should be @open@, for Linux @xdg-open@ or @exo-open@  (xfce).
- @pathrewrite@ := Comma separated list of entries of the form @A=B@ which replace parts in @file:///...A...@ to @file:///...B...@. Useful when you have absolute paths in the data which must be changed during the publishing process.
- @startpage@ := Number of the first page.
- @timeout@ := Maximum time of the publishing run. If time is exceeded, the publisher exits with status 1.


You can access the base directory of the project with @%(projectdir)s@. This is the directory with the file @publisher.cfg@.

All entries in the configuration file are optional. The configuration files are read in the following order: @/etc/speedata/publisher.cfg@, @~/.publisher.cfg@ and in the current directory @publisher.cfg@. The current directory can be changed on the command line with the switch @--wd=....@.


h2.  Command line parameters

The valid command line parameters are written on a "separate page":commandline.html.

h2.  Options given in the layout file

The XML layout file has a command called "Options":../commands-en/options.html that allows to set some parameters (tracing, default language, ...)
