---
layout: main
title: "Font inclusion"
---

h1. Font inclusion

h2. Formats

The speedata Publisher can use fonts in the followig formats:

* PostScript Type1 (@.afm@, @.pfb@)
* OpenType (@.otf@)
* TrueType (@.ttf@)


h2. How to include a font

In the layout rules the name of the font file must be connected to an internal name. This internal name is then used in the command "DefineFontfamily":../commands-en/definefontfamily.html which groups up to four fonts in a _family_ (regular, bold, italic and bolditalic). The first step is accomplished with "LoadFontfile":../commands-en/loadfontfile.html:

{% highlight xml %}
<LoadFontfile name="Helvetica" filename="helvetica-regular.otf" />
<LoadFontfile name="Helvetica Bold" filename="helvetica-bold.otf" />
<LoadFontfile name="Helvetica Italic" filename="helvetica-italic.otf" />
<LoadFontfile name="Helvetica BoldItalic" filename="helvetica-bolditalic.otf" />
{% endhighlight %}
    
After executing these commands, the font files are known as @Helvetica@, @Helvetica Bold@ etc. In the second step they are used by the command "DefineFontfamily":../commands-en/definefontfamily.html:

{% highlight xml %}
<DefineFontfamily name="heading" fontsize="12" leading="14">
  <Regular fontface="Helvetica"/>
  <Bold fontface="Helvetica Bold"/>
  <Italic fontface="Helvetica Italic"/>
  <BoldItalic fontface="Helvetica BoldItalic"/>
</DefineFontfamily>
{% endhighlight %}
    
The font family @heading@ is composed by the four given font files. Now you can use the font family in commands such as "Textblock":../commands-en/textblock.html or "Table":../commands-en/table.html.

h2. Note

The @LoadFontfile@ instructions can be auto generated on the command line. You need to run the @sp@ program with the command @list-fonts@, such as

pre. sp --xml [--extra-dir=...] list-fonts

The output contains all font files that are found in the current directory (and its subdirectories). Additional directories can be supplied by the shown command line option @--extra-dir=<dirname>@. The value for the @name@ attribute in the @LoadFontfile@ command defaults to the postscript name of the font but can be changed to any other value.

