layout: main
title: speedata Publisher manual
---
Changelog ([feed](../changes-en.xml))
=====================================

{{/*
       changelog is now in changelog.xml

*/}}{{ template "changelog" . }}


Version 2.0 (2014-07-01)
-----------

-   New [Command line parameter](commandline.html) `cutmarks` to display cutmarks. (1.99.46)
-   New [XPath-function](xpath.html) sd:merge-pagenumbers() (1.99.44)
-   **The default horizontal alignment for table cells is now `left`**
-   New option `justify` for horizontal alignment in
    [Table](../commands-en/table.html) (1.99.43)
-   New option for [Table](../commands-en/table.html) to let adjacent
    cells merge the borders (`border-collapse`). (1.99.42)
-   New options for [NewPage](../commands-en/newpage.html) to skip a
    page. (1.99.41)
-   Add more languages for hyphenation, [sp command
    line](commandline.html) extended with switch `--mainlanguage`.
    (1.99.40)
-   [Tablerule](../commands-en/tablerule.html) has a new attribute:
    `start` to give the start column.
-   New way to define grid cells. You can use nx and ny to determine the
    number of grid cells in x or y direction.
-   New command [Until](../commands-en/until.html). Should be obvious
    what it does…
-   New attributes `widow` and `orphan` bei
    [DefineTextformat](../commands-en/definetextformat.html). The
    default for text is now to prevent orphans and widows.
-   New attribute `attributes` in
    [SaveDataset](../commands-en/savedataset.html) to allow attributes
    for the root element.
-   New [XPath-function](xpath.html) `sd:imageheight()`.
-   The schema is autogenerated from the documentation.
-   [Image](../commands-en/image.html) accepts an URL (`http://...`) as
    an argument for `url`.
-   New feature `pagetype` in [NewPage](../commands-en/newpage.html)
-   Add [Option](../commands-en/options.html) `resetmarks`.
-   Rename [Option](../commands-en/options.html) `ignoreeof` to
    `ignoreeol`.
-   Access system fonts with `--systemfonts`. Doesn’t work on Windows
    XP, and currently not on Linux.
-   Change [Mark](../commands-en/mark.html) functionality to append
    data. Also gets automatically reloaded on the next run.
-   New [XPath-function](xpath.html) `sd:current-framenumber()` to
    determine the current frame in the given positioning area.
-   New Command [Makeindex](../commands-en/makeindex.html).
-   New [Command line parameter](commandline.html) `timeout` to set
    maximum time for publishing run.
-   Experimental option `ignoreeof` to remove \\n (newlines) in the XML
    source.
-   New [Configuration](configuration.html) `pathrewrite` to change
    absolute paths (`file:///....`) for each publishing run.
-   New [Command line parameter](commandline.html) `show-gridallocation`
    to show allocated grid cells.
-   New color model `gray` (1.7.1)
-   `vreference` at [PlaceObject](../commands-en/placeobject.html).

Version 1.8 (2013-12-13)
-----------------------

-   Critical bugfix: don’t drop characters like à that contain a space
    character in the UTF-8 sequence.
-   New [command line option](commandline.html) `--profile` (1.7.2).
-   New option in the configuration file: `fontpath` to set fallback
    directories for fonts (1.7.1).

Version 1.6 (2013-05-24)
------------------------

-   Width attribute in [Textblock](../commands-en/textblock.html) and
    [Table](../commands-en/table.html) optional (1.5.56)
-   Allow [group](../commands-en/group.html) specific grid (1.5.49)
-   New [XPath-function](xpath.html) `sd:decode-html()` to decode `&lt;`
    and similar entities into real HTML. (1.5.47)
-   New commands [Ol](../commands-en/ol.html) and
    [Ul](../commands-en/ol.html), just like HTML. `Ol` and `Ul` (with
    `Li`) are also allowed in data. (1.5.46)
-   Hyperlinks are allowed in data: `<a href="http://...">text</a>`.
    (1.5.46)
-   New command [A](../commands-en/a.html) for hyperlinks (same as
    HTML). (1.5.45)
-   New attribute `version` at command
    [Layout](../commands-en/layout.html) to ensure version number
    (1.5.44).
-   New command [HSpace](../commands-en/hspace.html) that inserts a
    stretchable space. (1.5.43)
-   New sp-command `compare` for [PDF comparison/quality
    assurance](qualityassurance.html) (1.5.42)
-   New command [Br](../commands-en/br.html) that inserts a newline. Br
    tags also allowed in [Value](../commmands-en/value.html). (1.5.41)
-   New [XPath-function](xpath.html) `sd:format-number()` to add
    thousand’s separator to numbers (1.5.41)
-   Rename [XPath-function](xpath.html) function `sd:format-number()` in
    `sd:format-string()` (1.5.41)
-   New command [Loop](../commands-en/loop.html) to repeat the contents
    of the element for a given number. (1.5.38)
-   New [XPath function](xpath.html) `sd:pagenumber(<mark>)` to obtain
    the page number of a mark (1.5.36).
-   New command [Mark](../commands-en/mark.html) to create invisible
    markers. (1.5.36)
-   New [XPath functions](xpath.html) `ceiling()` and `floor()`
    (1.5.36).
-   New options: `sp --wd DIR` to set the working directory. See
    [command line](commandline.html) (1.5.36)
-   New command: `sp clean` to clean up. See [command
    line](commandline.html) (1.5.35)
-   Changed [XPath-function](xpath.html) `sd:alternating()` and
    introduced `sd:reset-alternating()`. (1.5.35)
-   Attribute `eval` in [Table](../commands-en/table.html) for XPath
    expression execution. (1.5.35)
-   File uri now uses three slashes for file access:
    `file:///c:/foo/bar.baz` (cf. [File URI
    scheme](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_URI_scheme#Windows_2))
    (1.5.35)
-   New XML parser – no special binary needed anymore (1.5.35)
-   [Image](../commands-en/image.html) accepts an URI (`file://...`) as
    an argument for `file`. Similar the [XPath expressions](xpath.html)
    `sd:number-of-pages()`, `sd:imagewidth()` and `sd:file-exists()`.
    (1.5.33)

(Changelog until 1.5.32 is available in German only. See [the German
changelog](../description-de/changelog.html))

